August 30th, 2010 - MJ, MOB, SB, MS, BL
----------------------------------------

1) Agenda for TDWG
   -- need to develop an agenda
   -- review with Hilmar Tuesday
   -- TDWG abstracts due Wednesday


   -- document core model and location
      -- document extension ontologies (sbc, plant-trait)
   -- document meta-collaborations on SONet site (JWG*)
   -- core model group:
	-- OWL-based framework for observational data modeling
	-- 

Towards that end, we might plan a session focused on an exchange standard where we: 1) outline the results/agreements from the Ithaca meeting, and 2)
work on an exchange format that can handle data originally marked up in OBOE, O+M, and EQ, among others.  Maybe we could have a quick conference call
early next week to try to plan an agenda -- I can try to work one out on Monday as a straw man, then maybe we could chat on Tuesday, allowing us to
submit abstracts by Wednesday?  That might give just enough time to see if TDWG can give us a 1/2 day slot during their working group sessions.


2) Status from Ben

   -- ontology repository
      -- bioportal as basis
      -- strategy for versioning: new versions import and extend old version

   -- review search UI work
      -- ben has search under the hood in Metacat, no UI
      -- next step is: ?

3) Need annotations to test search
   -- Margaret will coordinate SBC annotations
   -- Mark will coordinate plant trait annotations
   -- will store on fred as common place for us to test searching

v1 -> v2
A -> A' (A deprecated)
     A' is subclassOf A
B -> B' (B deprecated)
C ->
A has B

X annotated to A using v1
Y annotated to C using v2

G <- (H I)

G <- (H I J)