
Shawn's examples summarized (in email on May 16) based on the discussion on May 21, 2010 (Wed).
Huiping put here as a reference.  

Depending on what "mode" you are in, the queries below could return
either observations or datasets. Here are some examples of expressions
and what they mean (assuming we are in "dataset mode"):

* Tree

This is a simple data discovery query that returns datasets that
contain at least one observation of a Tree entity. This one isn't that
interesting for us (at least in this simple form).

* Tree[Height]

This again is a simple data discovery query that returns datasets that
contain at least one observation of a Tree entity where the Height of
the Tree was measured. Again, not so interesting.

* Tree[Height > 5 Meter]

This one returns datasets that have at least one Tree observation
containing a Height measurement with a value greater than 5 Meters.

* Tree[Height > 5 Meter & DBH]

This query combines the simple and (more) complex query constructs
from above. It returns datasets that contain at least one Tree
observation with a Height measurement of at least 5 Meters and a DBH
measurement (but we don't care what the value is).

* Tree[Height > 5 Meter], Soil[Acidity >= 7 pH]

This one returns datasets that contain at least one Tree observation
(having a measurement where the Height was greater than 5) and at
least one Soil observation (having an Acidity measurement of 7 or
greater).

* Tree[Height > 5 Meter] -> Soil[Acidity >= 7pH]

This query incorporates context via the "->" (arrow) symbol, which can
be read as "contextualized by" or "has context". The query returns
datasets that contain at least one Tree observation (with the
corresponding height value) where the observation was taken within the
context of a Soil observation (with the corresponding acidity value).

* (Tree[Height], Plant[Biomass]) -> (Plot[Name], Air[Temp]) -> Site[Name]

This query returns datasets that have Tree and Plant observations with
Height and Biomass measurements, respectively, where these are
contextualized by the same Plot and Air observations, and these Plot
and Air observations are contextualized by the same Site observation.

* Tree[Height] -> Plot[Name], (Air[Temp] -> Site[Name])

This query shows a different grouping for context relationships: Tree
observations are contextualized by a Plot observation and an Air
observation, where the Air observation is contextualized by a Site
observation (but the Plot observation is not).

* Tree[avg(Height) > 7 Meter, Dbh < 4 Meter]

This query demonstrates the aggregation. I think this should return
datasets with at least one Tree observation containing Height and Dbh
(with a value less than 4 meters) measurements such that the average
Height of these is greater than 7 Meters. I need to think about what
the semantics of this is a bit more.